What happens if we combine
these things together?
Now we've got like an all-in-one machine,
it's the producer-packager, and
let's pretend like we need to
be able to use the packaging and
the producing side independently, it's not
one thing that handles everything for us.
So we have a new interface
that describes this.
And let's, as before,
create one for a snack,
arbitrary snack, and one for cookies.
So here's my cookieProducerPackager.
Here's it producing a cookie,
packaging it.
It's doing something in here.
And then here's the snack equivalent.
Well, it's gonna flip a coin and
give us a cookie or a pretzel, so
we can't depend on what
it's gonna give us, right?
And then if we look at the package side,
well, this the same implementation we had
above, where it's gonna be able
to handle any kind of snack.
It can handle a cookie, it can handle
a pretzel, it can handle anything else.
And let's check our assignments again.
Are we type equivalent in one direction or
both?
It turns out neither.
What we have created here, this scenario,
we would say, we've created invariants.
Because we have a place
where we're accepting
an argument in and
we're returning a thing.
Nobody's happy, right?
So in this side for this first assignment,
we're trying to have a snack,
you produce your packagers standing in for
the cookie one.
The produce side is unhappy.
It's saying, look I need this
thing over here on the left,
it needs a function that's
guaranteed to spit out cookies and
you're spitting out pretzels sometimes,
I can't live with that.
And then down here, snackProducerPackager,
it's saying, hey, look,
I have this function package, which
needs to be able to take in cookies and
pretzels, and you only accept cookies.
I'm not happy with that either.
So what we have now is that we
can't establish any sort of
relationship between ProducerPackager
between two different type
params that have a relationship
with each other.
So effectively now,
we would say ProducerPackager is
invariant over its type parameter.
Now you you can do this,
although it's the default,
it's what happens if you
don't say anything at all.
You could do that, there's not much point.
This is implicitly present before
every single type param that does not
have one of these explicit notations.
Some of you are probably
wondering why would you do this?
What are the benefits for denoting this?
We will get to that in a moment.
Okay, we have one more thing we have
to model in our cookie factory,
quality control.
We have two employees we've hired,
one very seasoned employee,
they know how to do quality
control over cookies and pretzels.
And they can inspect any kind of snack,
and the whole factory, and
they just really know what they're doing.
We also have somebody that we just hired,
they know the cookie business,
they can inspect a cookie.
But they've never seen
a pretzel before in their life,
they can't do quality
control over pretzels.
So here are two functions that
represent those quality control checks.
We've got the one that
only works on cookies and
then the one that works on
an arbitrary snack, right?
And we see here,
it's doing the cookie check and more,
it's even calling into the cookie
quality control check.
Now, we'll take these
quality control checks, and
let's create a type that describes
the act of checking a bunch of cookies,
or snacks, or whatever and
preparing them for shipment.
And what we have here is a call signature,
right?
We take in a group of unchecked items and
a quality check function,
and presumably we're going to return
the things that pass the quality check.
So this is our new type that has
a type param that we're exploring.
So as before, we're gonna create one for
cookies and one for snacks.
So, here we've got prepareSnacks, and
we're saying it's a prepareFoodPackage
with snack as the type param.
We've taken the unchecked items and
the callback, and
we're going to just like
array.filter over the array.
Implementation here is the same,
they're just of different types.
So let's see how it turns out.
We've got an array of cookies and an array
of snacks just to use as test values.
So look at this.
We can say prepareSnacks,
pass in the array of cookies or
the array of snacks, and it works with
the cookie quality control check.
This is that inexperienced employee who
only knows how to check the cookies.
This is working.
And then prepareCookies, that work
with the snack quality control check.
What we're seeing here is bi
variants where it's not just
things are interchangeable
in one direction.
They're interchangeable in both
directions to the same good,
prepareSnacks and we've got this,
this check that only handles cookies.
That seems problematic, right?
What I did in my tsconfig is I
turned strict function types off.
So if I turn it back on, there we go.
Good.
There's the type checking we
were looking for.
If you've ever wondered what strict
function types do beyond adding more
strictness to the checking
of functions somehow,
this is specifically what it does.
Without this compiler setting turned on,
it allows for
bivariance in function types.
It allows things to be used
interchangeably where it's not
desirable for that to happen.
As long as strict function types are true,
you get covariance over function types,
which is how it should work.
In fact, yeah,
that's what we're seeing here, right?
The experienced employee that
can check cookies and pretzels,
it's totally fine for them to prepare the
cookies, they can stand in for anything,
cuz they can check anything here There
are a couple other places where you might
see bivariant behavior in TypeScript, but
they all involve combining things,
they don't involve type params.
Bivariants in general is undesirable,
because it's not very sound
when used in this particular
context when talking about a type
parameter and a generic type.
So, what do variance helpers do for you?
Why do we care?
I've just created a new, clean example
here so we can work in isolation.
Well, one thing they do is
they keep you honest, right?
You can say I can live
within a certain constraint,
I want to be alerted if I
ever deviate from that.
You can see, all right, we've got in T,
which means I am contravariant
over type parameter T.
And this works, right?
This is just like the cookie packaging
machine, it's the equivalent.
But if I add the produce side here,
it's gonna say hey, hey,
hey, you can't do this.
You can see it's even saying
Example<super-T> and Example<sub-T>.
I need to be able to assign
a super T to a sub T, and
it should work out cuz that's
what contravariants means.
The types returned by
produce are incompatible
between these types, so
it objects to produce.
It objects to produce
because this is not returning
a type T is not contravariant behavior.
Similarly, if we did this.
Well, we're saying this is a covariant.
Example is covariant over
its type parameter, and
here it's gonna say,
package is not using T in a covariant way.
So you can sort of set up
a constraint here that ensures that.
Type equivalence between subtypes and
supertypes works in
a particular direction.
More importantly, I mean it's
good to have these constraints,
I wouldn't advise putting these
all over the place in your code.
Cuz especially for more complicated types,
you'll end up changing these and
you end up in a, you have to break
out of this at some point anyway.
But if you're building
highly recursive types, or
if you're building types that are used
incredibly frequently in type checking.
It's some little very atomic
thing where you've got hundreds
of thousands of values that are all
type checking, providing an in or
out variance hint greatly
speeds up type checking.
TypeScript literally can
skip over a bunch of stuff,
because the way it works by default,
it assumes that it could work either way.
It has to check all of the different
possibilities, supertypes and subtypes.
And if this variant hint is here,
it can literally skip over a very
large chunk of that work and
extremely efficiently
performed type checking.
So if you're working
on a large project and
your type checking is getting slow, and
where you would see this is the code
hints in VS Code would be
popping up very slowly.
There's a lot of lag maybe when you
run yarn type check which in this
project would just without emitting
JavaScript, it would compile and
see if there are any errors.
If that's getting slow, this is one of
the things that you can start to look at.
But variance is also a useful
thing to understand in
terms of how generic types
relate to each other and
how that is aligned with the relationships
between their type params.